Hi, I'm Larry Coope at Apple Engineer.
In this video,
you'll learn about structuring
your application and data
to support a dynamic,
flexible architecture.
We'll also talk about reusability
and communication throughout
your application flow.
You'll learn how to be ready to adopt
new features and technologies as
they become available in iPhone OS.
Welcome to Effective iPhone
Application Architecture,
or as I like to say,
doing things right every day.
We're all here today because you want,
and Apple wants, the same thing.
The best possible application
for your users in the App Store.
And we feel over the years
we've learned a thing or two
about building applications
for the Mac and for the iPhone.
Starting in 2001 with the
initial release of Mac OS X,
all the way up to iPhone OS 3.0.
We've learned the paradigms, the models,
the design patterns that work every day
to build an effective architecture and
that allows you to build a flexible,
dynamic application that you can
move forward into the future.
But we understand the realities as well.
You start with a simple idea,
and you start building your application,
and pretty soon you've got
something that you like.
You start showing it to friends,
and you take it into work,
and pretty soon, before you know it,
you start adding features.
The designers come and talk to you,
start adding new screens, new data.
And what happens is things slowly
build and can get out of hand quickly.
You start with a prototype,
and pretty soon you've got
a system that is working,
but has not been built from the ground
up to do the right things every day.
And that's all about what
we're talking about here today,
is extending your application
architecture to make sure that you
can benefit from all the tools and
frameworks that Apple provides.
So I want to talk about
four things in this session.
And the first one,
Data Persistence Design Decisions
Memory Management Application Lifecycle
People ask me why we would talk
about data persistence first before
we talk about design decisions.
And that's because if you don't
understand your own data and your
own model underlying that data,
it's tough to make design decisions
about your application and the workflow.
So let's talk about data persistence.
First of all,
we've got to talk about the kinds
of data that you're going to
use in your iPhone application.
First of all, we've got user data,
your media and your documents,
your audio files,
things that the user has control over.
You've got user preferences, state,
navigation state, application state,
when they close.
You have sensitive data, usernames,
passwords.
And of course, you have cached data.
And by cached data, I mean data that can
be rebuilt dynamically,
but you want available for
quick access to your data set.
So when you talk about user data,
we've got multiple options.
I'd like to point out some
of the data sets we see and
things to do and not to do.
The first thing is not to
use unstructured text files.
This is not a proper data
set and a proper model.
Unstructured data is unstructured
data and it's difficult to
maintain and manage and extend.
But we do have property lists.
You've all been familiar with this.
NSDictionary.
Straight XML.
Fantastic use on the phone.
We've got archiving.
If you're not familiar with NSCoding,
it's a very powerful technology for
freeze-drawing objects on the phone
and restoring them later on the fly.
We've got SQLite.
And now in iPhone OS 3.0,
we've got Core Data.
So let's talk about
choosing your storage,
your data storage,
from the multiple options
that you have available.
The first question you
have to ask yourself is,
is this a user-controlled data set?
And by user-controlled data set,
I mean that it's a data set that can
grow from potentially zero to infinity.
That the user maintains and is not under
direct control of your application.
If the answer to that is yes,
then you should be looking at Core Data.
Core Data is a powerful technology
that's been available on the desktop
and is now available in iPhone OS 3.0.
If the answer to that is no,
that this is not a
user-controlled data set,
the next question is,
is it a small data set?
And if the answer to that is yes,
then you can look at things like
XML and NSDictionary to store your data.
However, if the answer is no,
that it's a large data set,
even though it's under
your programmatic control,
you still need to be
looking at core data.
All right, now that we've talked about
choosing your storage,
I want to talk about
implementing your storage.
And first, we need to talk about
proper data objects.
As you build your data store,
it's easy to start saying, well,
I've got all these separate
objects I need to store,
and I want to put them all
aggregated in one place.
So we can see NSDictionary as
a nice repository of storage.
And that can be very interesting
for simple data types.
But what happens is as we build these,
Each key value pair
requires a key string.
And what can happen is you
start to spread these strings
all throughout your code.
And there's no contract between
the object and the dictionary and
the clients of that dictionary.
In the sense of,
Value for key just returns an ID.
It's not strongly typed.
So pretty soon, you see these APIs spread
throughout your code.
You're accessing the dictionary,
but you don't even know what type
of value you're going to get back.
So you define constants and
strings to make sure that you can
separate out the code a little bit,
but quickly,
this spins out of control because,
like I said, there's no contract between
the clients of that dictionary
and the dictionary itself.
These are just opaque types,
and so you don't have any idea
what's happening underneath the hood.
So we recommend that you don't store
these type of objects in dictionaries.
You want real, proper data objects.
And that means in an
object-oriented world,
we have an object that has the
properties and the attributes on that
property to make that contract complete.
So when you use those APIs,
there is this implicit contract
between the object and the client.
So for instance, in this case,
if I want to change the name
of my session from a simple
string to an array of strings,
the compiler is going to help
me when I choose that storage
and I change that property type
from a string to an NSArray.
So let the tools help
you do that every day.
So this is how you want to
structure your data objects
as true objects in the system,
high-level objects that have
this implicit contract between
the clients and themselves.
Next, let's talk about user preferences.
And these are handled by a single class
inside the iPhone called NSUserDefaults.
And these are really just
for lightweight settings,
things like navigation state.
Certainly in our own apps,
in the iPhone app,
the list of cities is stored
in the NSUserDefaults.
And, in fact,
those navigation states are a
simple index stored in the phone.
So when you quit the
application and launch back in,
that index is retrieved,
and it's just an index into that
array inside NSUserDefaults.
Now, it should be important to point out
here that this NSUserDefaults is
not for heavyweight data.
No large images, no archived objects.
You do not want to use NSCoding here
and store these inside NSUserDefaults.
And it's certainly not for
sensitive data like passwords.
For that case, we have the keychain.
This is where you want to
store all your sensitive data
pertinent to your application.
And what people forget is not
only can you store your sensitive
data on a per-application basis,
we also have the ability to
store the sensitive data for a
company-wide set of applications.
So what you can do is if you have, say,
a multiple set of social
networking applications,
you can store your keychain data such
that when the user logs in for the
first time with their application,
one of your applications,
then the next time they
launch the other application,
they're not required to log in
again because you've stored that
in the company-wide keychain.
And this gives the user a very nice
user experience because they don't
have to log in every single time
to all your different applications.
Next,
we'll go back and talk about cached data.
And why do we talk about
here faster iTunes backups?
Because it's important where you
store that cached data to give the
user the best possible experience,
even when they're not
using your application.
So this is all about storing your
data in the proper locations.
And these locations are
in NSPathUtilities.h,
and it's a single line of code to use.
What's important to point out here is
you do not want to use hard-coded paths.
You should never have a hard-coded
path anywhere in your application.
It's trivial to get the path to
any arbitrary folder on the system.
And let's look at some of those folders.
We have NSTemporaryDirectory.
The NS Caches Directory and
the NS Documents Directory.
And what's important to point out here,
as you see on the slide,
that during backup,
the NS Temporary Directory may
be cleared by the system,
but it is not backed up.
The NS Caches Directory is
left alone on the device,
but it is also not backed up.
Remember, cache data is data that you can
restore at any time or regenerate.
Certainly, your NS Document Directory and
almost everything else inside
the phone is backed up.
So the point here is that even when
the user is not using your application,
not even thinking about
using your application,
if you store your data
in the proper locations,
you give the user the best possible
experience because we don't want to
have them backing up unnecessary data
and slowing down that backup process.
All right.
Design decisions.
We've talked about data.
Now we need to talk about how to
decompose your app workflow to make
changes easier so you can move your
application forward from a feature basis.
What are we going to cover?
Well, first we're going to talk
about targeting the iPhone OS,
application flow,
and the information flow
within your application.
What are we going to cover?
So targeting iPhone OS.
This is about choosing
your application's reach.
Obviously, iPhone comes out,
we have a base SDK and
a large feature set,
and all the users are
available on that base SDK,
and they're using that,
and your application
is going to cover that.
But pretty soon,
Apple puts out a new release of the OS.
It's got some new tools.
And then it's not as
quickly adopted initially,
so you feel safe that
I can stay on that SDK.
But pretty soon, iPhone OS 3 comes out.
And we've got massive adoption of that.
And you need to broaden your
reach and get those customers and
take advantage of those features.
But how do I do that without
leaving my customers behind?
It's very, very simple.
It's all about the deployment target.
And that will give you the
broadest coverage for all your
users and all the SDKs and OSs.
But how do you stay current and do that?
Well,
it's all about maximizing your exposure,
and it's very, very simple.
You always link against the latest SDK.
There's really no reason for
you to stay on an older SDK.
And all you do is once you've linked
against that latest SDK is you simply
set your iPhone OS deployment target.
And this is how you adopt
new features dynamically.
And what will this do for me?
Well,
what it does is it allows me to weak
link against the newest frameworks,
and then at runtime,
I can test for the presence
of those new API sets,
and I don't have to base any of
my behavior off the OS version.
This is very, very important.
You should never base any specific
functionality off the version of the OS.
You should do dynamic lookup.
And so to do that,
you need to know how to understand
how to read the availability macros.
So let's look at those real quick.
In this particular case,
what this macro says is that if the
current OS version of the Mac is
greater than or equal to 10.4,
then this code is going to be compiled.
Or in our case, what's more important,
if it's greater than or
equal to iPhone OS 3.0.
So that means if it's
iPhone OS 3.0 or better,
then this framework code is going
to be included in my compilation.
But what's more important,
as you can see, this is taken from the
UI image picker controller,
is the other availability macros.
In this case,
we see OS X available starting,
and this tells me that it's
never been available on the Mac,
and it is available
starting in iPhone OS 3.1.
In the next case,
the secondary macro says
OS X available but deprecated.
So this is a pair of values.
In this case, we're looking at the
allows image editing,
which is also in the
UI image picker controller.
And this says that it's never
been available on the Mac.
It's never been deprecated on the Mac.
It started to be available in
iPhone OS 2.0 and now has been
deprecated in iPhone OS 3.1.
So it's an easy pairing to see how you
read that to tell me what's available.
So how do we take advantage of
these features at runtime without
leaving our older customers behind?
It's very simple.
Runtime checking.
And it couldn't be easier.
In this case, this sample code,
not only I can check
not only for the class,
but specific implementations
inside the class.
So in this example,
I'm checking to see if MF Mail Compose
View Controller is available.
And NSClass from String does that for me.
And the really interesting thing
about weak linking and dynamic loading
is if that class is not available,
NSClass from String
will simply return nil.
So it's very powerful.
I can check at runtime on the fly
to see if this class is available.
And if it is not nil,
then the class is available.
I can use our old friend
response to selector to see if
specific methods are available.
And in this case,
I'm checking to see if I can send mail.
And then, of course, in this example,
if that's not available,
I'll fall back to just calling this
a traditional mail client with a URL.
Also, it's important to note
that for C functions,
because the dynamic loader at runtime,
if you weak link,
resolves symbols that are not
available on this version of the OS,
it resolves them to null.
So the important thing is this
is called a T vector test.
And so in this case,
the UI save video at path to save
photos album is a C function.
And I can simply test for the presence
of that function by testing against null.
Because like I said,
weak linking tells the system
if that method or if that
function is not available,
just mark its address as null.
So this is really,
really powerful technology,
one of the most interesting things that's
available at the low level in the system.
So weak linking and runtime checking
are very important so that you get the
broadest coverage for your application.
Now, let's talk about application flow
and how to design your application
with some of the constructs that
we've talked about previously.
The important thing is
organizing your content.
On these smaller devices,
it's really important to stay focused,
not only on UI,
but on the data that you're
presenting to the user.
So, as you see in our own apps,
it's important to focus on one thing at a
time and drill down into greater detail.
So I want to talk about one of
our examples called recipes.
And what's interesting about
the recipes application,
even though it's relatively
straightforward and simple,
it's a good example of how to structure
any application and get the best possible
use of the architectures we provide.
In this case, as you saw,
the recipes application
has three screens.
A list of recipes,
so we have a list controller.
We have a detail screen,
which shows an individual recipe,
so we have a detail controller.
And we show a photo of
the finished product,
so we have a photo controller.
And this is important to talk about.
UI View Controller is one of
the basic building blocks for
almost every iPhone application.
And the idea here is one screen,
one view controller.
As I said, this is a small device.
You need to stay focused.
The best applications stay focused
on their data for the user.
And what you do is you simply
subclass UI view controller to
add your own application logic.
And this slide is important to
look at because the view controller
encapsulates the three most
important parts of your application.
The view system, what the user sees,
the data, your model,
and of course the logic that
binds all those together.
And I said, this is the basic building
block for every application,
and you'll see this time and time again.
So what is the role of
the view controller?
Well, at Apple, we talk a lot about MVC,
Model View Controller.
And this is a great design pattern
that you should use in every
application that you're building.
The point of the view controller
is it is that controller that
we talk about in the MVC model.
But in this case,
the view controller is very interesting
because it also is responsible
for loading the view system,
typically from your nib
or programmatically.
But the important part is here
it acts as the arbiter between
your model and the view system.
And in this diagram, I want to point out
something very important,
which is what you don't see.
You should never have that
direct connection between the
model and the view system.
If you do,
you've got a problematic architecture.
It's not going to be flexible,
it's not going to be dynamic,
and it's not going to be changeable.
So the idea is that this view controller,
like I said, acts as a model.
It acts as the arbitrator of these
objects and handles that flow in between.
So make sure you don't tightly couple
your model to your view system ever.
And in this example, we're going to use
UI Navigation Controller,
which just implements a stack
of view controllers and lets you
build up a nice drill down UI,
as we say, into your application.
So, we've talked about the
flow of the application.
How do we make the information
work within that flow?
Well, we need to talk about the model.
This is your data.
And in this case,
we're looking at a recipe application.
So, we've got a database
with a set of recipes.
And in this case,
we're going to be using core data.
As I said,
it's a great way to store your data.
And then, inside each recipe,
we've got other data objects,
ingredients, instructions,
and a small image.
And, as well,
we have a large image attached to each
recipe that shows us a finished product.
So one thing that we see people
doing is they have many screens,
one model, and so they just think, well,
why not?
Why don't I just do this?
Why don't I just make my model,
since I only have one model object,
accessible to every screen,
every view in my system?
Well, that gets very problematic as we
talk about a dynamic application
architecture and as you want
to add features down the road.
So what we like to see is a more
unique coupling between the screens
and the data they represent.
Again, we're focusing on
UI and focusing on data.
So let's talk about the flow of
that data in our application.
Since this is a recipes application,
we're going to have our
application delegate,
and it's going to be responsible
for loading that recipe database.
It's also, however,
going to be responsible for
instantiating that first view controller,
that first list-based view controller,
and handing it that database,
that list of objects
that it needs to display.
Then that view controller is going to
be responsible for the detail view.
And the important thing here is that
that detail view is going to be given
the recipe that it's going to show.
It is not going to take the recipe.
It's going to be passed that data.
And this is a common theme that's
very important as part of your
data flow through your application.
You need to make sure that
you're not sharing data.
You're passing that data or
you're transferring ownership
to that view controller.
So it only needs to know about a recipe.
It doesn't have to know about
the list of recipes or anything.
It just knows about the one
model object it's concerned with.
And of course, in the same case,
that detail view is then responsible for
instantiating and putting that photo view
on screen as well and passing the photo,
again, transferring ownership of that
data object to that view controller
so that it can display that.
So let's go back and talk about
that application delegate.
It's going to load our model,
and it's going to hand it off
to the first view controller.
So here you see in our application
to finish launching method,
we're going to instantiate our
list table view controller,
and we're going to pass it the
core data manage object context.
Manage object contexts are,
think of them as a
scratch pad for core data.
And each controller may or may not
have to know about this manage object
context depending on its context
and what it's going to do with that.
But this is what core data passes
around so you can access the
data inside your core data model.
And then we're going to push
that navigation controller on,
and we're going to see it on screen.
So what happens next?
Well, like all things iPhone,
it all starts with a user action.
So I'm going to make a selection,
and when that happens,
I'm going to get my table view did
select row at index path method call.
And the important thing here is
we want to determine the minimal
amount of required data to pass
to that next view controller.
Again,
transferring ownership of that data set.
So we're going to ask the
fetch results controller,
which again is a core data object,
that I want it to give me
that object at index path.
And it's going to return
me my recipe object.
And then I'm going to instantiate
my detail view controller,
and I'm going to give it the
recipe that it needs to display.
And then I'm going to push it
on to the navigation stack,
and then I'm going to forget it.
Very nice, very simple,
very straightforward, right?
Well, we forget until something happens.
Like, I would like to edit my recipe.
What if I want to edit the contents
or the instructions or just
simply the name of the recipe?
Well, right now,
we know that the ListViewController
knows about the DetailViewController,
that it's presented to the user.
Well, if I want to change that
data in that recipe,
the parent will need to know.
And what's important here is that
the list view might have to update
if I change the name or some
other data inside my detail view.
That list view is going to have to
reflect that when I display that.
So it needs to know about
changes in individual recipes.
And you say, well, the parent,
the ListView,
the parent already knows about the
child because it's put that on screen.
So maybe I'll just do this and
have a back pointer to the parent.
Well,
in an effective application architecture,
this is typically a bad idea.
What we want to use is delegation,
which you're probably already
familiar with if you've done
application development for the iPhone.
Delegation is, again,
a very powerful application architectural
strategy and design pattern that
you should be using every day.
And the interesting thing
about delegation is you get
to declare the protocol.
You get to declare the API set.
And that's really,
really powerful to me because then
I have control what these delegates,
what kind of data they send off,
and what that means to the someone
who's listening to that delegate.
So when I declare a protocol, again,
it's very straightforward, simple syntax.
And in this case,
I'm going to declare a protocol that
says that the recipe did change.
So for the recipe detail view controller,
recipe did change colon.
This is my method.
It's a single method that I'm going to
declare for my delegates to support.
I simply create a delegate property.
What's important to remember here
is the delegate property is on the
object that needs to be declared.
So I'm going to declare a protocol
that says that the recipe did change.
And that's really,
really powerful to me because then
I have control what these delegates,
what kind of data they send off,
and what that means to me.
So think of it as I'm going from the
object that knows that something's
changed to someone that might want
to know that something's changed.
My delegate is the object that
is listening to these changes,
if you want to think of it that way.
So I'm going to declare a protocol
that says that the recipe did change.
What's important to remember here
is the delegate property is on the
object that needs to be declared.
So in my Detail View Controller,
I'm going to create a
recipe detail delegate.
And, like most delegates in the system,
they are simply assigned.
You typically do not retain a delegate.
And that's why it's important
about being a good delegate.
First of all, you implement the protocol.
As part of my interface for my
recipe list table view controller,
you'll notice here,
That I declare that I support the
Recipe Detail View Controller Delegate.
I support that protocol.
And indeed, I will implement that method.
And in this case,
since I'm the list view,
all I'm going to tell myself
is to reload the data,
because something in
that recipe has changed.
So I want to reload my list to
reflect any of those changes.
Don't forget to set the delegate.
And this, again, couldn't be easier.
Going back to our code
snippet from before,
I'm creating my detail view controller.
I give it the recipe.
Then I set myself,
the list view controller,
as the detail delegate.
But it's important to be
a responsible delegate.
And what's important here is
to be aware that the delegating
object may outlive you.
So what do we mean?
Well, in this case, say the list view
controller was to go away,
and we're going to take that off screen.
Well, it's important since the list
view controller put the detail
view controller on screen and
gave it itself as the delegate,
we need to make sure that if we go away,
if we are dialect,
that we tell that detail view
controller that we have gone away.
And we do this simply by sending
its recipe detail delegate to nil.
Remember, like I said,
delegates are typically not retained,
so you must notify that object
and set its delegate to nil.
This is a standard design
pattern throughout the system.
So it's important to be a good,
responsible delegate.
But let's talk about
alternatives to delegation.
And the number one is notifications.
Delegation being a one-to-one
mapping is very powerful,
but what if I have multiple clients that
need to know about the recipe changes?
Well, then you would use notifications.
NS notifications vary again, very simple.
You simply add yourself as an observer to
those notifications and listen for them.
But like delegation, it's important,
and we see this time and time again,
to make sure that you tell the
notification center if you're going away.
So in this case, if we are listening to
a certain notification,
we need to tell the notification
center that we are going away.
Sending messages to nil
is not a problem in Cocoa,
but sending messages to a
garbage pointer is a problem,
and you're going to get a crash.
So again,
be a responsible notification handler.
There's also key value observing.
We don't have time to go
into it in this session,
but key value observing lets you
watch and listen in to particular
methods and objects inside your system.
It's very powerful,
and core data uses that quite heavily.
And how does that pertain
to our example today?
Recipes and core data.
Well, in this case, all those systems,
notifications, delegation, and KVO,
are in play.
We have our NSManaged object context,
which as part of core data,
registers for every property
in your core data schema.
This is very, very powerful.
Then we have NSFetch Results Controller,
and that talks to the NSManage
object context to get and
retrieve your recipe data.
So what happens when
that recipe data changes?
Well, I'm going to be notified via
KVO to my NSManageObject context
that the recipe has changed.
Like I said,
Core Data automatically registers for
every property in your Core Data schema.
So if you change a recipe or
any attributes on that recipe,
the NSManageObject
context will be notified.
Then, notification is sent out from the
managed object context because there
might be multiple fetch results
controllers listening for those changes.
And then your list view, in this case,
is a delegate of the
NSFetchResults controller,
and that's going to let your list
know that it needs to reload the data.
So all these notification systems, KVO,
notification, delegation, are in play.
And this is, again,
a very typical design pattern that we
use in our own applications and you
should take advantage of to structure
your application architecture.
So we've done all this
separation of model,
data, UI views.
Why are we doing this?
Well, the most important reason is reuse.
And you see this every day inside
our own frameworks and applications.
Think of the people picker,
UI image picker.
All I have to do is instantiate
one of those objects,
And I have them,
I simply declare myself as a
delegate and present them on screen.
And I immediately have that built-in
functionality with very little code,
and I don't have to write
these objects myself.
So I can absolutely
reuse these every day.
And in our case,
the recipe detail view controller,
if I was going to stick it in a
cookbook instead of a recipes,
maybe I had a cookbook application.
I could reuse that same recipe detail
view in my cookbook application.
And simply by setting the delegate,
I would again notify whoever's listening,
whoever that delegate object is,
that the recipe has changed and
update my any data or UI accordingly.
And of course,
this allows me to reorganize my views.
Since I don't have a tight
coupling to a parent,
that is, that I have to know exactly
what its class and structure is,
I can easily reorganize my
views in my application to take
advantage of that flexibility.
So we've talked about
application workflow and UI flow.
So let's talk about...
Memory Management No one wants
to talk about memory management.
It's not that sexy,
but we have to do it every day.
So first is understanding,
do we even have a memory problem?
And it's surprising how many
application developers don't even
know if they do have memory problems.
So we first need to identify the
problem and look at the tools we
have to analyze those problems,
and look at models, views,
and controllers,
and how they can help us debug our
application if we have memory problems.
So the first step is understanding
that you do have a problem.
So how do we know that
we've got memory issues?
Well, obviously,
you've got intermittent crashes.
You see crash logs without a backtrace.
Or surprisingly enough,
lots of developers never
even check the console,
and you'll see low memory warnings
in the console from your application
in low memory situations.
So it's important to look at these.
So given that we think
we have a memory problem,
what tools are available for me
to help me debug my memory issues?
Well, first and most important,
we have instruments.
And we have two tools inside instruments,
Leaks and Object Alloc.
And we're not going to
talk at length about this.
That is talked about in one of the
other optimizing your application
performance in one of the other sessions.
But what I want to talk about is
that Leaks will help me find focused
memory leaks inside my application.
It's a very powerful tool for doing that.
And Object Alloc,
which I really like because
it gives me kind of a memory
footprint of my application.
It gives you a life cycle
of the memory usage.
As you're building your application,
you typically know where you're
using memory very heavily or not.
And Object Alloc will
show me that footprint.
And when I see things
going away inside my code,
I should see that Object Alloc
footprint decreasing.
So I recommend that users or
developers use these tools at
least once a week to maintain that
"We want to make sure that the user
is able to access the interface
to their application and make
sure that they're not letting
the memory system get out of hand."
Secondly, we've got the simulator.
And it's important to remember that the
simulator can simulate a memory warning.
And what's powerful about this is
that it's very tough to simulate a
memory warning on the device itself.
You don't want to write debug
code that's going to go off and
allocate memory just to force the
system into a low memory situation.
Use the simulator to simulate those
low memory conditions and help
you debug your memory problems.
And it's important also to
point out that you can use
instruments with the simulator.
It's not just bound to the device.
So you can use instruments, leaks,
and object alloc on the
simulator as well as the device.
Also, we now in Snow Leopard, in Xcode,
we have Xcode Static Analysis.
I really, really want to push you guys
to be using these tools.
It's only available in Snow Leopard,
but it really helps you resolve
these retain-release problems that
we see in lots of applications.
And what's important to point out
here is Xcode Static Analysis.
You do not have to run your code.
It simply analyzes your code.
It doesn't build it.
It doesn't have to do anything.
It statically analyzes.
It's based on the Clang tool.
It's very powerful.
But what's important to point out here as
well is that you should trust the tool,
but you can get false positives.
You know your code better.
So you need to verify the
results of the static analysis.
output.
Very, very powerful tool.
Next, we talked about models
of view controllers.
Well,
how can they help my memory problems?
First off, view controllers are very
important basic building block,
as we said, of the application.
Every application is using these.
And it's important to remember
that you don't have to cache them.
They're typically very lightweight,
loaded from a nib,
and so there's no need to
cache a view controller,
especially when it's not on screen.
And the important thing is,
remember that view controllers
automatically know how to
respond to memory warnings.
When you instantiate a view controller
from the template inside Xcode,
you will see this did
receive memory warning.
This is where you put your code.
Now, what's important to remember
is that now in iPhone OS 3.0,
the default behavior for did receive
memory warning is to unload the view
attached to that view controller.
And then your view did unload method will
be called automatically by the system.
This is very important.
First, it's important to call
superviewDidUnload,
and then you need to release
any objects that you have
persistent properties attached to.
So in this case,
I have a view that I'm holding on to.
Well, remember that by the time
viewDidUnload is called,
the context of any subviews is gone,
right?
Your view has been unloaded.
So you've just got these little
objects floating out in space.
You need to make sure that you release
them so that the system can then
take advantage of that freed memory.
And what's interesting, again,
is that when memories are covered,
your viewDidLoad will be called again,
just like the first time you
call your view controller,
instantiate your view controller,
and your viewDidLoad code
will be called again,
and you'll have a chance
to set all these things up,
and your outlets from
the nib will be restored.
So you don't have to do anything.
But you are responsible at
unload time to make sure you
release any of those outlets.
Now, how can our model object help
us with memory situations?
Well, as we pointed out earlier,
it's important to spread that model thin,
right?
You want to transfer ownership
of the minimal required data set
to each of your view systems.
And core data can really,
really help you with this.
Because, first of all,
it knows how to load a
partial object graph.
Very important in a
tight memory situation.
Also, it has automatic faulting.
So it can fault objects in or out
of memory in low memory situations.
And, of course, it already knows how to
respond to memory warnings.
So it does the right thing on
its cache and all its data set.
So, again, you can really take advantage
of core data and simplify your
application by using that.
So the takeaway here is
that memory is important,
and you should be using the tools
frequently to make sure that what
you are expecting out of your
application is truly happening when
you're running your application,
that you're seeing the memory
footprint that you expect.
And we have the tools
that help you do this,
but it's also important to make sure
that your architecture takes advantage
of that and helps you maintain the proper
memory footprint for your application.
And especially as you go
forward and add features,
it's definitely important to take
advantage of those situations,
those frameworks.
Okay, lastly, we want to talk about
application lifecycle.
And what do we mean by
application lifecycle?
Well, we're going to talk about
four important points here.
Compatibility,
implementation versus calling,
handling interruptions,
and just a brief bit about concurrency.
Padability.
One big issue we see with developers
is that they have namespace collisions.
Remember in Objective-C,
there is no name mangling
like there is in C++.
So it can be easy to bump
into duplicate names and have
inappropriate behaviors based on that.
So in this case,
we have our WWDC session object,
and we have another framework
that's built into the system
that has a session object.
We're going to call it
a WWDC session object.
And in our own application frameworks,
you'll say that GameKit has a GK session,
and so there's less chance
of a name collision.
You should definitely take
advantage of that simple
paradigm as you build your app.
paradigm as you build your architecture.
To avoid those namespace collisions.
Also, for method names,
make sure you avoid underscores.
Apple reserves the right to have
all private methods use underscores.
So here's what can happen.
Say I have this can have cheeseburger
method in my WWDC table view cell,
this class I'm implementing.
Well, what happens if there's a private
method in UI table view cell
called can have cheeseburger?
Well, you can see that there's an
immediate namespace collision.
So what happens is if we're running
That code at runtime in the internal
UI kit is talking to your TableView cell,
and it says, "Okay, TableView cell,
can I have a cheeseburger?"
It's going to call our
WWDC table view cells method.
And of course, this is not what we want,
and this is not what the
internal frameworks expect.
So avoid underscores
on your base methods,
because there might be an
identical private method that
Apple is using internally.
And to help you do that,
remember that Xcode has a
wonderful refactoring tool that
lets you change your IVARs,
your method names,
your entire class names,
and will do it automatically.
No more searching through your
code and textually searching
and replacing and worrying that
you're going to break something.
The refactoring tool takes all that into
consideration and will refactor your code
and your names automatically for you.
Also,
as part of your application lifecycle,
it's important to understand
proper code paths.
I see this time and time again,
that people don't always understand
that there's a fundamental difference
between implementation versus calling.
And these are totally different usages.
Remember, in specific cases,
you implement DrawRect.
You do not call DrawRect.
You call SetNeedsDisplay.
You implement LayoutSubviews.
You call SetNeedsLayout.
And remember that things like
LoadView are there not for you to call,
but for the system to call when
you access the view property.
You implement LoadView.
You simply access the view property.
And by doing that,
your LoadView method is going to
be able to call the view property.
And by doing that,
your LoadView method will be called.
This is very, very important,
especially things like DrawRect.
When you do call DrawRect directly,
if you try and do that,
not only will it probably not
give you the desired results,
it's actually a performance hit.
I hear people saying, well,
I want the best possible performance,
so I'm just going to
call DrawRect directly.
We have a fully composited system,
so you must call SetNeedsDisplay
to invalidate your UI and
not call DrawRect directly.
If you call SetNeedsDisplay
a million times,
that's going to only end
up calling DrawRect once.
But if you call DrawRect
directly a million times,
then it's going to
call DrawRect directly,
and you're going to
have a performance hit.
Again, we have a modern UI system.
You'll always prefer invalidation.
And the same thing for SetNeedsLayout.
If that just sets a bit that your
subviews need to be laid out,
and at some point the system
will call you to do the right
thing with your layout subviews.
And this is how the...
This is how the phone works,
and it's a true object-oriented system.
So you need to be aware about what
you're responsible for implementing for
what you're responsible for calling.
Next in the application lifecycle,
we want to talk about interruptions.
Handling interruptions is very important
on the phone because you don't know
how you're going to be interrupted
and where they're going to come from.
Obviously, we have text messages,
phone calls, iCal alerts, clock alarms,
and now push notifications.
So it's important that you
know how to handle these,
and it's very, very simple.
There's basically three delegate messages
that you need to be responsible for.
When an interruption occurs,
and in this case,
I'm getting a phone call,
you need to implement
Application Will Resign Active.
Again, you implement
Application Will Resign Active,
and the system will
call you automatically.
And this is important for you to pause
and save the state of your application,
because at this point,
you don't know what's going to happen.
You've resigned to active status,
but you don't know what
the user's going to do.
And let's say in this case,
the user dismisses.
Then you're responsible for implementing
the application didResumeActive.
And this will happen if they
dismiss that interruption.
Now, it's important at this point,
depending on the context
of your application,
what you want to do.
We recommend for most applications
that they stay in their pause state.
Certainly for a game,
you don't want to come back from
a phone call and automatically,
when you get that application
did resume active,
start your car again going 90
miles an hour down the road
and run into a brick wall.
So it's important to understand,
based on your application,
what its needs are, what you do when you
get that resume active.
The iPod application, obviously,
when it gets the did resume active,
just starts playing the music
again because there's no need for
the user to interact with that.
It will just start playing again.
So we talked about if the user dismisses.
Now what happens if the user accepts?
Well, we're going to get our old friend,
application will terminate.
You're already doing this in your
iPhone application code because this is
the same as pressing the home button.
And that's where you can
also save state if you like,
if you haven't updated your
data on disk at that point.
But like I said,
this is the same as pressing home button.
It's important to point out, though,
that this is application will terminate.
It's not application will terminate.
Application might terminate
or may I terminate.
This is application will terminate.
You must shut down at this point.
And lastly, I want to just talk
briefly about concurrency.
I'm going to talk more
about this in Part 2,
but I just want to touch on it,
what's important here as part of my
overall application architecture.
Obviously,
concurrency means performing side tasks.
And the number one thing that people
want to do is networking tasks.
But what I want to point out here
is it's really important to use
asynchronous APIs when they're available,
especially, as I said, for networking.
Things like NSURL connection.
You do not want to use a blocking API for
a high latency operation like networking,
right?
You don't want to say,
go off and make this
connection to a web server.
You don't know if you're
on an edge connection,
a 3G, Wi-Fi.
So you want to keep your
application responsive.
So by using the asynchronous APIs with
these high latency operations,
we give the best
possible user experience.
So always prefer those
asynchronous APIs when they're
available in the system.
Also, NSOperation,
I'm going to talk about this much,
much more in Part 2.
But it's very powerful
for doing side tasks,
but it should be used for low latency,
high demand operations,
side tasks that you want
to take advantage of.
But it's important to remember as
part of the application lifecycle,
if you're going to do these side tasks,
make sure you illustrate
any activity to the user.
Inside UI application,
we have network activity
indicator visible,
we've got a UI indicator view,
and we've got UI progress view.
So just make sure if you're going
to go off and do these side tasks,
that if you need to,
especially if you're waiting for results,
you're blocking your application,
that you show that to the user.
So in summary,
we want to manage our data carefully,
and it impacts our architecture.
We want to separate
those responsibilities,
stay focused one thing at a time,
transfer ownership of data and
objects so that we can break our
application apart and reuse components.
We want to conserve memory
by doing those same things,
breaking apart our application
into smaller and smaller chunks,
and we want to maintain
that user experience.
Whether we're focusing on
data or doing side tasks,
we want to maintain the user
experience and be as dynamic
and flexible as possible.
Thanks for watching.
If you're looking for more
demos or code examples,
make sure you check out Effective
iPhone Application Architecture,
Part 2.